## The Zometool Connection to Octonions

**Introduction**

If you are reading this, then you probably already understand that Zometool is very good at modeling 4-dimensional polytopes in the H(4) symmetry family.  You probably also know that the Zome System existed before Zometool and that Zometool was invented because of this connection to H(4) polytopes.  However, as I hope this essay will explain, it also means that you have acquainted yourself with integral octonions.


You might have heard that octonions "explain" a lot of "exceptional" or other weird phenomena in algebra, geometry, and/or topology.  This is all true, but, as we shall see here, we may also include the Zome Canon in this list.  Geometrically, the integral octonions comprise a lattice in 8-dimensional space, known in various places as the Gosset-Korkine-Zolotarev lattice or simply the E(8) lattice.  Every connected Zometool model is a shadow of a subset of the E(8) lattice.  We get a hint about this from the Zometool model of Gosset's semiregular 8-dimensional polytope [link or photo].

This is some of the weirdest (and most weirdly beautiful) math ever conceived by humans and you should regard yourself as lucky if you can grasp all of this.  I find it a sad fact that most people will never even glimpse this abstract gemstone. 

(Incidentally, we should mention that humans have known about octonions since 1843 when John Graves, William Hamilton, and Arthur Cayley were contemplating quaternions.  Graves and Hamilton were close colleagues in Ireland while Cayley was working independently in England.  The invention of quaternions is usually credited to Hamilton, although Olinde Rodrigues in 1840 had developed some formulas while working with Euler's four-square theorem and 3-dimensional orthogonal transformations which we can now describe as being quaternion-adjacent.  In any case, given the short time span between the time when quaternions and octonions emerged in the human experience, we should regard octonions as being just as natural as quaternions.  No extra-terrestrial being would discover quaternions without immediately discovering octonions shortly after.  I wonder if extra-terrestrials might also discover Zometool.)

**Octonions**

In order to read this essay, you must become intimate with the best notation around for working with octonions, specifically my notation.  The notation is idiosyncratic while being perfectly natural.  After all, we are talking about octonions here.  What did you expect when you linked to a page promising to relate Zometool with integral octonions?  There are other workable notations, like in the book by Conway and Smith (in the References below), and the reader is urged to compare and contrast to see why my notation, as presented here, is superior to all others.

In our notation for octonions, we postulate that (i) the set {1,a,b,c,ab,ac,bc,(ab)c} is an orthonormal basis and (ii) the subset {a,b,c} generates the octonions as an algebra.  The notation itself implies some postulates.  For example, the symbol 1 spans the 1-dimensional center of the octonions, also known as the real octonions.  Notice that the real octonions comprise an embedded copy of the real numbers.  Similarly, the subalgebra generated by any one of the "imaginary" units {a,b,c,ab,ac,bc,(ab)c} should comprise an embedded copy of the complex numbers and the subalgebra generated by any two of these units should comprise an embedded copy of the quaternions.

We hope that it is obvious that ab denotes the product of a and b, and likewise for the other compound expressions.  Thus, we can get an embedded copy of the quaternions if we map f(i):=a, f(j):=b, and f(k)=f(ij)=f(i)f(j)=ab.  One must take care with the symbol (ab)c, which denotes the product of ab and c.  In this case, since octonions are not associative, we cannot assert that (ab)c and a(bc) are the same octonion.  However, we do have a(bc)=-(ab)c.  Notice that there are six permutations of the symbols {a,b,c} and there are two different ways to group a product of three of these.  This means that there are a total of 12 distinct expressions (ab)c, a(bc), (ac)b, etc. that one may form with these symbols.  All of these expressions are octonions, and it turns out that all of these are equal to each other modulo -1.  There is a pleasant action by the dihedral group of order 12 on these expressions which we may depict:

This leads to a useful rule of thumb when working with this notation (which the reader will eventually appreciate).  First, if {x,y,z} are any three of these imaginary units that generate the whole algebra, then we have x(yz)=-(xy)z.  The example with x=a, y=b, z=c was already given, but it holds for any three.  To take another example, if x=a, y=ab, and z=ac, then {x,y,z} generates the octonions and this rule tells us that a((ab)(ac))=-(a(ab))c.  There is a simple parity check for determining when three octonions generate the whole algebra, and you can work it out for yourself.  We may combine this with the rules that say that the square of any imaginary unit is -1, yx=-yx for distinct x and y, and the subalgebra generated by two octonions is associative to obtain -(a(ab))c=-(aab)c=-(-b)c=bc. Thus we have a((ab)(ac))=bc.  You will now build a complete multiplication table for all of the given units {1,a,b,c,ab,ac,bc,(ab)c}.  Since this is a (vector space) basis for the algebra, this tells you everything you need to know about multiplying octonions.

**Hurwitz Integers**

The "domain" of Hurwitz integers, alsio called the integral quaternions, is a bridge from quaternions to integral octonions.  Here you will start to see the "numbers" getting very strange.

We should back up and discuss the Gaussian integers.  The Gaussian integers is the subring of the field of complex numbers generated (as an abelian group) by the units {1,i}.  Thus, every Gaussian integer has an expression x+iy, where x and y are ordinary integers.  It is a very pleasant place.  In fact, it is an integral domain which has division with remainder.  One should pause and reflect that the notion of "division with remainder" depends on the quaternions having a norm.  The norm of a complex number x+iy is the distance from (x,y) to the origin (0,0) in the plane, and the norm of w+ix+jy+kz is the distance from (w,x,y,z) to the origin (0,0,0,0).  If n and d are Gaussian integers and d is not zero, then there exists Gaussian integers q and r such that n=dq+r and the norm of r is strictly less than the norm of d.

It is natural enough to try to do this with the quaternions, although there is a snag.  Thus, we define the *Lipshitz integers* as the subring of the quaternions generated (as an abelian group) by {1,i,j,k}.  This ring is pleasant, but not pleasant enough.  Specifically, even though it has a pleasant norm, it does not have division with remainder.  Let us define the Hurwitz integers.  First, define a quaternion by q:=(1+i+j+k)/2.  Then the *Hurwitz integers* is the subring of the quaternion generated by the Lipshitz integers and q.  It is fairly routine to verify that if a Hurwitz integer w+ix+jy+kz is not a Lipshitz integer, then all four of {2w,2x,2y,2z} are odd integers.  For example, notice this is true for the generating element q defined above.  The Hurwitz integers are a domain in the quaternions that possess division with remainder that is maximal in the sense that any larger such domain is simply the algebra of quaternions (which is boring).

One should notice that the Hurwitz integers can be constructed in an infinitude of ways inside the quaternions.  However, the construction is unique as soon as one specifies an orthonormal basis {1,p,q,r} of the quaternions.  Consider the potency of this assertion.  Suppose {1,p,q,r} is any orthonormal basis for the quaternions.  Then one may construct an isomorphism which maps f(1)=1, f(i)=p, f(j)=q and f(k) is either r or -r.  In particular, there is a embedded copy of the Hurwitz integers generated (as an abelian group) by {p,q,r,(1+p+q+r)/2}.

We should at this point mention the Eisenstein integers.  Define the *Eisenstein integers* as the subring of the field of complex numbers generated (as an abelian group) by the cube roots of 1.  Like the Gaussian integers, the Eisenstein integers comprise a ring with division with remainder.  There is also some pleasant geometry, where the Gaussian integers yield the tiling of the plane by squares and the Eisenstein integers yield the tiling of the plane by equilateral triangles.  It is a remarkable fact that the Hurwitz integers contain embedded copies of both the Gaussian integers and the Eisenstein integers.  (This is a good exercise for the reader.  You might notice that the sixth power of the quaternion q=(1+i+j+k)/2 is 1.)

**Integral Octonions**

The integral octonions are the closest we can find to a domain with division with remainder within the space of octonions.  

Recall the orthonormal basis {1,a,b,c,ab,ac,bc,(ab)c} for the octonions and its multiplication table.  Among the seven imaginary units {a,b,c,ab,ac,bc,(ab)c}, there are precisely 21 subsets of cardinality three.  (Elementary combinatorics!)  Among these 21 subsets, we distinguish between two types.  To be specific, a subset of cardinality three may or may not generate (as an algebra) the entire algebra of octonions.  If such a subset does not generate the octonions, then it generates an embedded copy of the quaternions.  (Exercise!)  Among the 21 subsets, precisely fourteen generate the octonions and each of the other seven generates its own distinct subalgebra isomorphic to the quaternions.  We may arranged these particular seven subsets in Fano's Plane:

This is a finite geometry with 7 points and 7 lines.  In this geometry, each pair of points lie on a unique line, each line contains precisely 3 points, and the geometry is self-dual through exchanging points with lines.  In a course in abstract algebra, we could define this as the projective plane over the field with two elements.  It is another remarkable fact that this Fano's plane, the smallest smallest example of a projective plane, arises naturally in discussing octonions.

We are nearly ready to define the integral octonions.  Remember that every orthonormal basis {1,p,q.r} of the quaternions generates a copy of the Hurwitz integers, generated (as an abelian group) by {p,q,r,(1+p+q+r)/2}.  We can do this for each of the distinguished subsets found among the seven lines in Fano's plane.  Define *Kirmse's integers* as the subgroup K of the octonions generated (as an abelian group) by all of these seven embedded copies of the Hurwitz integers in the octonions.  For example, K contains all linear combinations of the basis vectors where all of the coefficients are integers.  K also contains the octonions (1+a+b+ab)/2, (1+a+bc+(ab)c)/2, and even (c+ac+ab+(ab)c)/2.

Naming K after Kirmse and calling K "integers" is a slight against Professor Kirmse, who wrote a published assertion that K is closed under multiplication.  Unfortunately for Kirmse, it is easy to check that  K is not closed under multiplication.  We follow tradition in calling this assertion "Kirmse's mistake".  In any case, our purpose here is not to belittle Professor Kirmse, but it is instead to discuss Zometool and integral octonions.

Starting with Kirmse's integers K, we have seven different ways to define integral octonions.  To define integral octonions, first choose one of the imaginary units {a,b,c,ab,ac,bc,(ab)c}, say x.  Then there is a unique linear transformation from the vector space of octonions to itself which exchanges 1 with x and leaves all the other basis vectors fixed.  If one applies this linear transformation to K, then the resulting space is closed under octonion multiplication.


**Zometool**

Everybody who knows regular polytopes knows and must accept the fact that the Coxeter group H(4) is very strange.  We know this because 4-dimensional space allows the regular 120-cell and its dual and 3-dimensional space allows the regular dodecahedron and its dual.  Every other regular polytope in Euclidean space is either part of an infinite sequence of polytopes or is the 24-cell.


**References**

John H. Conway and Neal J. A. Sloane.
Sphere Packings, Lattices and Groups.
3rd ed.  Springer, 1999.

John H. Conway and Derek A. Smith.
*On Quaternions and Octonions.*
A. K. Peters, Wellesley, Massachusetts, 2002.

David Richter.  [Two results concerning the Zome model of the 600-cell](https://archive.bridgesmathart.org/2005/bridges2005-419.pdf).


